docs: eventstore (#1982)
caos/zitadel: docs/docs/concepts/eventstore.md

---
title: Eventstore
---

> ZITADEL is built on the [event sourcing pattern](architecture), where single events are stored in an eventstore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZITADEL is built on the [event sourcing pattern](architecture), where changes are stored as events in an eventstore.
```

## What is an eventstore?

Traditionally, data is stored in relations as a state

- A request needs to know the relations to select valid data

> - If a relation changes,  the requests need to change as well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a relation changes, the requests need to change as well
```

- That is valid for actual, as well as for historical data

> An Eventstore on the other hand stores events, meaning every change that happens to any piece of data relates to a single event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Eventstore on the other hand stores events, meaning every change that happens to any piece of data relates to an event
```

- Think of it as a ledger that gets new entries over time, accumulative
- To request data, all you have to do is to sum the events as the summary reflects the actual state
- To investigate past changes to your system, you just select the events from your time range of interest

> - That makes audit/analytics very powerful and manipulation of data almost impossible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- That makes audit/analytics very powerful, due to the historical data available to build queries
```
